---
layout: post
title: "Python"
description: ""
category: code
tags: [python]
---
{% include JB/setup %}
This is a post about python

<div id="table-of-contents">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents">
<ul>
<li><a href="#sec-1">1 Conceptual problems with the penrose process</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#sec-1-1">1.1 Tidal lead/lag</a></li>
<li><a href="#sec-1-2">1.2 Rigid rotation and superradiance</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#sec-2">2 Possible situations for creating a well-defined tidal lag</a></li>
<li><a href="#sec-3">3 Dissection of analogy between a tide on a planet and a tide on a BH</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#sec-3-1">3.1 Important</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#sec-4">4 Averaging</a></li>
<li><a href="#sec-5">5 Mirror case</a></li>
<li><a href="#sec-6">6 Chandrasekhar &ndash; The mathematical theory of black holes &ndash; (1983)</a></li>
<li><a href="#sec-7">7 Newtonian star + ergoregion + frame dragging</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-1" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-1"><span class="section-number-2">1</span> Conceptual problems with the penrose process</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-1">

<p>The standard Penrose process states that from the point of view of an observer
at infinity the energy of a particle in the ergosphere can be negative. Thus if
a particle splits in the ergosphere it is possible for one of the particles to
carry a surplus of energy. The wave analogy to this process is known
as superradiance. 
</p>
<p>
Speaking quantitatively, superradiance is
defined as the conversion of the flux tranmitted inbound across the horizon into
a larger outbound flux
$$\frac{\frac{dE_{\rm out}}{dt}}{\frac{dE_{\rm in}}{dt}} - 1 =
\frac{\frac{dM}{dt}}{\frac{dE_{\rm in}}{dt}} > 0$$    

One of the issues I have concerns the issue of stationary perturbations which
seems to be the canonical example to use for illustrating changes to a BH. There
is no inbound flux here since the perturbation is stationary (or almost
stationary in the case of a slow orbiting body) so we don't have a condition on
superradiance here or in other words the definition above does not apply. 
</p>



</div>

<div id="outline-container-1-1" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="sec-1-1"><span class="section-number-3">1.1</span> Tidal lead/lag</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-1">

<p>  Does tidal lead/lag in space/time improve our physical intuition of or have
  any bearing on superradiance in itself? If we consider the ergosphere as being
  the defining characteristic of superradiance (foregoing any issues regarding
  the possibility of outgoing waves suggested by Rickartz et al.) and the
  teleological nature of boundary conditions on the horizon, whereby the future
  duration of the signal influences the phase of the tide now, defining temporal
  tidal lead/lag, then I don't necessarily or easily see a one-to-one
  correspondence in this case. This could be well-defined though in special
  cases like an infinite circular orbit or possibly in the case where the
  spatial lead/lag is used instead of a temporal one.    
</p>




</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-1-2" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="sec-1-2"><span class="section-number-3">1.2</span> Rigid rotation and superradiance</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-2">

<p>What we have concentrated on so far is seeing how perturbations of the Kerr metric
effect the null generators on the horizon which ultimately is described by a
differential equation involving the shear \(\sigma\) as well as a Weyl scalar
\(\Psi_0\) measured on the horizon. If one simplifies to a situation where one has
a rigidly rotating field around the Black Hole then \(\dot{M}\) and \(\dot{J}\) are
proportional to \(\Omega - \Omega_H\) where \(\Omega\) is the rotation speed of the
orbiting field and \(\Omega_H\) is the angular velocity of the BH. This makes
sense; if the orbital motion of the field matches that of the BH horizon then
there is no shearing of the horizon and thereby no flux across it, however if
there is a non-zero relative velocity between these two values then the BH will
try to re-orient itself so as to match the background field. In our calculations
so far we usually assume a tidal field that bahaves as 
$$\Psi \sim e^{-i\omega t} e^{im\phi} = e^{im(\phi - \frac{\omega}{m}t)}$$ 
Now although this function
does not represent a rigidly rotating tidal field it does have a dependence on
\(\phi\) and \(t\) which is the same as that used for the derivation of the rigid
rotation formulae \(f(\phi - \Omega t)\). So all we have to do to find the expressions for \(\dot{M}\)
and \(\dot{J}\) involving \(\omega\) and \(m\) is replace \(\Omega\) with
\(\frac{\omega}{m}\). Then 
$$\dot{M} \propto \frac{\omega}{m}(\frac{\omega}{m} - \Omega_H)$$
Therefore if the frequency of the waves lies in the range 
$$0 &lt; \frac{\omega}{m} &lt; \Omega_H$$ 
then we will be in a regime where energy is extracted from the hole (\(\dot{M} &lt;
0\)) and superradiance will occur.
</p>
<p>
In the "Membrane Paradigm" section VIID1, a concrete example is given of a rotating BH
surrounded by a quadrupolar mass distribution, "a rigid girderwork
structure". Order-of-magnitude estimates are obtained for the slowdown of the
BH and this is compared with the quadrupolar GW emission rate of the rotating grid
structure. By building the model problem in this way one has a BH surrounded by
a rotating tidal field. It's relatively easy to draw an analogy to the Newtonian
case here. We can imagine a tide being raised on the surface of the BH and
through the interaction between this tide and the quadrupolar nature of the
orbiting matter we get a slow down in the spin of the BH. Quantitatively this
mechanism decreases the total mass of the BH by \(\frac{dM}{dt} = \Omega_{\rm
Matter}\frac{dJ}{dt}\). So we have something which behaves like Newtonian tidal
friction and we have an associated loss in energy from the BH but there is no
superradiance in this case. 
</p>
<p> 
In the derivation of the spin-down rate the natural way to look at the tidal
fields at the horizon is to go into a comoving frame with the horizon. In a
frame corotating with the horizon the fields will vary like
\(e^{i\Omega_H t}\). So in this frame there is a changing tidal field but I'm not
sure how this relates to an impinging GW, and to superradiance, if it relates at
all. There is clearly an analogy here between radiative and stationary
gravitational perturbations since they are interchangeable within this formalism
(i.e. replacing \(\Omega\) with \(\frac{\omega}{m}\) above) but the concept of superradiance does not carry over to the stationary
case. This worries me in terms of building a connection between tidal friction
and superradiance.
</p>
</div>
</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-2" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-2"><span class="section-number-2">2</span> Possible situations for creating a well-defined tidal lag</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-2">


<ul>
<li>One way is to put the orbital body in a fixed (slow) circular orbit and then look at
  the steady-state solution. We could choose the initial conditions to be
  \(\Omega = \Omega_H - \epsilon\). After some time the angular velocities should
  match and we could then compare the position of the tide on the BH relative to
  the tidal field before and after. Hartle PRD 9 2749 (1973) objects to this
  however since "the shapes of the instantaneous horizon in these two cases will
  not differ by a simple angular shift but by more complicated rotational
  distortions. In general cases therefore, there seems to be no reasonable way
  to define tidal lag in black holes"
</li>
</ul>



<ul>
<li>We could follow in Poissons footsteps and consider the slow-motion
  approximation whereby the angular velocity is small. We then have an
  expression for \(\dot{J}\) and also \(\dot{M}\) if we restrict to a circular
  orbit. However it should be noted that Poisson's expression for \(\dot{M}\) in
  Eq.(9.48) assumes \(\Omega \ll \Omega_H\) so that there is always a slow-down of
  the BH. Alvi (PRD 64 104020) Eq(11) includes the contribution of \(\Omega\) but still
  uses the condition that \(v \ll 1\) so this is more general than the result
  stated in Poisson, but it is a result which should be easily reproduced from
  the information provided by Poisson I think. 
</li>
</ul>



</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-3" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-3"><span class="section-number-2">3</span> Dissection of analogy between a tide on a planet and a tide on a BH</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-3">

<p>Section VIIC of the Membrane Paradigm discusses the situation of a static tidal
field around a black hole and compares its effects on it with that of a
Newtonian body. The differences are the following
</p><ul>
<li>"Because the space around the Newtonian body is flat and Newtonian gravity is
  linear, the tide producing field propagates unchanged down to the planets
  surface. The elongating tidal force points in the same direction as that of
  the field far from the planet." In contrast the "tidal force field at the
  stretched horizon of a BH has a rather large frame-dragging phase lag"
</li>
<li>"The planets self-gravity, internal pressure, and viscous stress respond
  together to the tidal force in such a way as to keep the planets shape
  oriented along the force, aside from a small viscous phase lag
  \(\Delta\phi_{\rm vis}\). By contrast, although the hole's surface pressure and
  viscous stress play key roles in the fiducion fluid's Navier Stokes equation
  and thence in the tidal torque, the inexorably strong dragging of inertial
  frames decouples the fiducions Navier-Stokes equation from the evolution of
  the fiducion shear; thus the surface pressure and viscous stress cannot affect
  the shear or the shape of the hole" 
</li>
<li>"The shear of the holes fiducion fluid responds to the tidal force with a
  teleological phase lead \(\Delta\phi_{\rm teleo}\)."
</li>
</ul>



</div>

<div id="outline-container-3-1" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="sec-3-1"><span class="section-number-3">3.1</span> Important</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-3-1">

<p>The most noteworthy idea from this section is that it is not just the
teleological nature which shifts the shape of the tide, but there is also a
contribution from the frame-dragging of the tidal-fields due to the rotating
horizon. It is the combination of these effects which dictates the orientation
of the horizon tide lag. If we are working in the limit of a slowly rotating BH
we should be able to neglect the frame-dragging contribution to the phase
lag. Therefore if we are to include the orientation of the tide on the BH in our
analysis we may want to stick to this regime at least initially.
</p>

</div>
</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-4" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-4"><span class="section-number-2">4</span> Averaging</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-4">

<p>Equations like \(\dot{M} \sim (\Omega - \Omega_H)I\) are valid only when
integrated over time intervals much longer than \(\kappa^{-1}\). The short-timescale variations are averaged out so that only secular
changes are kept. This is best described
in the "Membrane paradigm" Section VIC 11 where the full expression for the
change in entropy is written including the contributions from short time
intervals. 
</p>
</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-5" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-5"><span class="section-number-2">5</span> Mirror case</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-5">

<p>Rickartz et al claim that by placing a mirror at the event horizon one can shut
off the super-radiance phenomenon. They take the perspective of an observer at
infinity who sees particles/waves of negative energy being absorbed by the
hole (Note that these negative energy states can only exist in the
ergoregion). Then if the hole does not absorb a particle it cannot decrease in
energy or angular momentum and so there is no superradiance. The authors restrict their
examples to those involving scalar waves so it may be possible that their results may also apply
to gravitational perturbations but it's difficult to build intuition in this
case. The concept of a gravitational mirror is perplexing as well as the idea of
outgoing waves from the horizon.  
One could look to the particle case to build intuition. In that case a particle
with negative energy needs to cross (or be absorbed by) the horizon so that the BH can lose
energy. 
</p>
<p>
Questions
</p><ul>
<li>Would this mirror destroy the concept of a shear on the horizon?
</li>
</ul>

<p>The shear itself is defined by the ability of photons to escape from the
horizon. Without a mirror we would observe changes in the shear due to processes
outside the horizon, but with a mirror present the BH would be cut off from the
external universe so we would not be able to define a horizon or its shear.
</p>
<ul>
<li>What machinery from the Membrane Paradigm remains
</li>
<li>For the case of a physical body surrounded by an ergoregion do we get the same
  Damour-Navier-Stokes (momentum) equations and equations for the shear. For instance the
  frame-dragging close to the horizon is so large that the behaviour of the
  shear decouples from the DNS equations. A black hole has the same bulk and
  surface properties as a Newtonian object. What differentiates the tidal
  behaviour then is not the existence of these properties but that these
  properties do not contribute to the evolution of the shear in the BH
  case. The reason for this as stated above in the comparison between the
  Newtonian and BH tidal cases is that in the case of BH's the frame-dragging
  dominates the tidal fields in such a way a to drag the field lines along with
  the horizon thus decoupling the surface pressure, bulk viscosity from the
  shear and therefore nullifying their ability to influence the tide. So if we
  created a Newtonian body surrounded by an ergosphere one of the key features
  which we would need to turn off is the strond frame-dragging feature at the horizon.
</li>
</ul>



</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-6" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-6"><span class="section-number-2">6</span> Chandrasekhar &ndash; The mathematical theory of black holes &ndash; (1983)</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-6">

<p>As opposed to the methods used in the Membrane Paradigm which focussed on the
evolution of quantities on the horizon, Chandrasekhar describes the
perturbations of spacetime outside the black holes of the form \(e^{i\omega t -
im\phi}\)  and their associated potentials. 
To write the Teukolsky equation in a form which does not explicitly depend on
\(m\) (mode value) a change of variables is necessary. In place of \(r\), a new independent
variable \(r_*\) defined by 
$$\frac{\partial}{\partial r_*} = \frac{\Delta}{\rho^2} \frac{d}{dr}$$
where 
$$\rho^2 = r^2 + \alpha^2$$
and
$$\alpha^2 = a^2 + \left(\frac{am}{\omega}\right)$$  
The admissibility of negative values for \(\alpha^2\) allows for a \(r-r_*\)
relation that can be double-valued. This occurs if \(r_+^2 + \alpha^2 &lt; 0\). Then
\(r_*\) attains a minimum value when \(r=|\alpha|\) and \(r_* \rightarrow  <del>\infty\) both when \(r\rightarrow \infty\) and \(r \rightarrow r_</del> + 0\). There is a
singularity associated with this minimum so that we have two separate regions in
this instance. The Wronskian defined by 
$$W(Z_1,Z_2) = Z_1'Z_2 - Z_1 Z_2'$$
is a constant for two functions \(Z_1\) and \(Z_2\) which satisfy a second-order
differential equation like
$$Z'' = V Z $$
In one region where the Wronskian is constant one will find that \(R+T=1\) where
\(R\) and \(T\) are the reflective and transmissive probabilities. However in this
case where we have two distinct regions this is not necessarily the case. Using
the properties of the Teukolsky equation one finds that the Wronskians of both
regions are related by 
$$W(Z_1,Z_2)_{r<|\alpha|} = (-1)^{2s-1} W(Z_1,Z_2)_{r>|\alpha|}$$
Note that this result is based on the nature of the Teukolsky equation itself
and does not depend on the boundary conditions imposed. Also no superradiance
will occur for spin-\(\frac{1}{2}\) particles. Searching for 'Wronskian' in the
index of Chandrasekhar's book will lead you to the above content in much greater
detail than given here for the cases of Schwarzschild, Kerr and both electromagnetic and
gravitational perturbations. 
</p>
<p>
The reflective and transmissive probabilities are then given by 
$$R - T = 1$$
so that superradiance occurs. 
</p>
<p>
Using this formalism one should be able to extend the results found here to ones
including outgoing waves at the horizon in the same vein as Rickartz et
al. However I should reiterate that outgoing modes from the horizon are
unphysical; quoting Teukolsky's PhD thesis p.75 he states that we should "demand that
the radial group velocity of a wave packet, as measured by a physically
well-behaved observer, be negative (i.e. signals can travel into the hole but
not out)" or equivalently "require that a physically well-behaved observer at
the horizon see non-special fields. (Non-special means neither singular nor
identically zero)".
In order to avoid these issues we could allow for some physical barrier outside
the horizon and account for this distinction by propagating the asymptotic
solutions forward with the Teukolsky equation. 
</p>
</div>

</div>

<div id="outline-container-7" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="sec-7"><span class="section-number-2">7</span> Newtonian star + ergoregion + frame dragging</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-7">


</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="postamble">
<p class="date">Date: 2012-10-10T10:21-0400</p>
<p class="author">Author: Stephen O'Sullivan</p>
<p class="creator"><a href="http://orgmode.org">Org</a> version 7.9.2 with <a href="http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/">Emacs</a> version 24</p>
<a href="http://validator.w3.org/check?uri=referer">Validate XHTML 1.0</a>

</div>